what is an upfront contract and why do
you need one hey i'm sam dunning
co-owner over at webchoiceuk.com
and host of the top 100 marketing
podcast business growth show all right
so what the heck is an upfront contract
and why do you need one so i'm sure
you've had conversations with customers
where they've just really wanted to talk
about perhaps themselves or their
problem the whole combo you want to talk
about your solution eventually and
neither of you really had the outcome
that you've desired so that front
contract helps prevent that it helps
build trust with your buyer credibility
it helps keep you as a seller in control
of the conversation helps you both reach
a beneficial
end outcome
so i'm gonna give you two examples of
upfront contracts upfront contracts have
really helped me with my selling i'm
going to talk about a discovery
called upfront contract and a
presentation pitch demo version of an
upfront contract so let's jump into the
discovery call this could be useful for
a face-to-face or a phone or a video
call with a perspective customer
so
once you've done your intros here's how
you can play it
so what i typically say is
let's use john as an example hey john i
want to spend about 20 minutes today
understanding
a bit more about your business kind of
the problems you've come to us with
and to see if we can potentially help
i'm going to ask a few questions and i'm
sure you'll have a few questions for us
and usually by the end of this call
there's typically three things that can
happen
the first could be after we've had a bit
of a chat you may feel that myself my
company's not the best fit for you if
that's the case
no problems at all do you mind telling
me sam i don't think we're we're going
to be a good fit to work together
because of what you've said
is that a problem for you john
and they'll usually say no
absolutely fine
and i'll say look there could be a few
reasons for this you might feel that our
solution doesn't fit your needs or
our pricing is about the range or
perhaps our timings or our team you
don't get on with so just let me know
john no problems at all and we can keep
in touch with you projects oh you say
yep fine secondly
it could be that after i've learned a
bit more about your business your goals
your problems and where you want to get
to john i may feel that us here at
webchoice aren't the best fit to help
you out and again that could be for a
couple of reasons could be
because of what you need to do perhaps
we don't off the service perhaps we're
not on the same line in terms of pricing
or timings or we just can't quite help
you so if that is the case do you mind
if i just say look probably not the best
fit for us i'm afraid
but i'll try and refer you to a company
who i feel is a great fit and then we
always say as the customer says yeah no
worries at all or thirdly by the end of
our call or by the end of our meeting we
may both agree that there is a good
match for us to do some business so if
that is the case can we spend a couple
minutes just the end of our conversation
agreeing what might be a relevant next
step and again they're nearly always
going to say yes here so
the reason this works so well is because
you set the guidelines for the call you
give your prospective customer an out at
any time which saves you time saves them
time and you give yourselves an out at
any time which saves you both time and
finally you agree that you can spend a
couple minutes at the end of the call
discussing a relevant next step and you
can talk about what that next step is
that's going to vary for businesses
whether that's a demo whether that's a
presentation whether that's a proposal
that's a paid audit whatever that
may be just let them know okay and the
second example of an upfront contract
for use on presentations proposal
walkthroughs pitches whatever it may be
is a bit like follows so hey john
before we get stuck into our
presentation today i just want to go
through what we recapped from our
discovery cool so in today's
presentation it's going to take about 30
minutes if that's okay with you
so just going through the time frame
make sure they've got the time that you
discussed so it's not cut short for any
reason there's nothing worse than the
presentation getting cut short and i
also want to make sure that everyone we
agreed is is on the cool so you've got
yourself john is the
director of the company we've got your
marketing manager and we've also got
your head of sales
is there anyone else
that we need on the call that needs to
be involved in this conversation
make sure they say no if they do say
that yeah we've missed someone out can
we bring them in or do we need to
reschedule
okay and in this presentation today
we're going to go through
your goals that we discussed we're going
to go through our recommended solution
we're going to go through
the commercials so your investment time
frames
is that all okay make sure they say yes
is there anything you'd like to add john
that we've perhaps not covered they
might say can we make sure we include
this take a note and do so
and finally
if at any stage during our presentation
you feel that this is not the good the
best match for you do you mind just
telling me sam
not really going to be the best fit
pretty sure what you've got to say but
probably not going to be one for us i'd
rather you stop me early to save your
time and our time
well finally if if that doesn't happen
are we okay to discuss a relevant next
step moving forward so can we decide if
it does make sense to move ahead at the
end of the call and again make sure they
say yes so you're setting the grounds
for a good presentation a good
conversation you're agreeing what the
deliverables are again
you're walking them through what you're
going to talk about you're talking about
the duration you're making sure the
decision makers are present and you're
giving them out any time and lastly
you're saying look if if we cover
everything you need are we okay to to
move something forward and those are two
examples of how an upfront contract can
look how they build trust how they set a
clear agenda and make sure you're in
control of the sales process
if you enjoyed today's episode do hit
that subscribe button
and with that as always we should catch
you on the next one cheers